Almost all the algorithms we have studied thus far have been polynomial-time algorithms: on inputs of size $n$, their worst-case running time is $O\left(n^k\right)$ for some constant $k$. You might wonder whether all problems can be solved in polynomial time. The answer is no. For example, there are problems, such as Turing's famous "Halting Problem," that cannot be solved by any computer, no matter how much time we allow. There are also problems that can be solved, but not in time $O\left(n^k\right)$ for any constant $k$. Generally, we think of problems that are solvable by polynomial-time algorithms as being tractable, or easy, and problems that require superpolynomial time as being intractable, or hard.

The subject of this chapter, however, is an interesting class of problems, called the "NP-complete" problems, whose status is unknown. No polynomial-time algorithm has yet been discovered for an NP-complete problem, nor has anyone yet been able to prove that no polynomial-time algorithm can exist for any one of them. This so-called $P \neq N P$ question has been one of the deepest, most perplexing open research problems in theoretical computer science since it was first posed in 1971.
Several NP-complete problems are particularly tantalizing because they seem on the surface to be similar to problems that we know how to solve in polynomial time. In each of the following pairs of problems, one is solvable in polynomial time and the other is NP-complete, but the difference between problems appears to be slight:

1. Shortest vs. longest simple paths: In Chapter 24 , we saw that even with negative edge weights, we can find shortest paths from a single source in a directed graph $G=(V, E)$ in $O(V E)$ time. Finding a longest simple path between two vertices is difficult, however. Merely determining whether a graph contains a simple path with at least a given number of edges is NP-complete.

2. Euler tour vs. hamiltonian cycle: An Euler tour of a connected, directed graph $G=(V, E)$ is a cycle that traverses each edge of $G$ exactly once, although it is allowed to visit each vertex more than once. By Problem 22-3, we can determine whether a graph has an Euler tour in only $O(E)$ time and, in fact, we can find the edges of the Euler tour in $O(E)$ time. A hamiltonian cycle of a directed graph $G=(V, E)$ is a simple cycle that contains each vertex in $V$. Determining whether a directed graph has a hamiltonian cycle is NP-complete. (Later in this chapter, we shall prove that determining whether an undirected graph has a hamiltonian cycle is NP-complete.)

3. 2-CNF satisfiability vs. 3-CNF satisfiability: A boolean formula contains variables whose values are 0 or 1 ; boolean connectives such as $\wedge(\mathrm{AND}), \vee(\mathrm{OR})$, and $\neg(\mathrm{NOT})$; and parentheses. A boolean formula is satisfiable if there exists some assignment of the values 0 and 1 to its variables that causes it to evaluate to 1 . We shall define terms more formally later in this chapter, but informally, a boolean formula is in $k$-conjunctive normal form, or $k-\mathrm{CNF}$, if it is the AND of clauses of ORs of exactly $k$ variables or their negations. For example, the boolean formula $\left(x_1 \vee \neg x_2\right) \wedge\left(\neg x_1 \vee x_3\right) \wedge\left(\neg x_2 \vee \neg x_3\right)$ is in 2-CNF. (It has the satisfying assignment $x_1=1, x_2=0, x_3=1$.) Although we can determine in polynomial time whether a 2 -CNF formula is satisfiable, we shall see later in this chapter that determining whether a $3-\mathrm{CNF}$ formula is satisfiable is NP-complete.

### NP-completeness and the classes $P$ and NP

Throughout this chapter, we shall refer to three classes of problems: P, NP, and $\mathrm{NPC}$, the latter class being the NP-complete problems. We describe them informally here, and we shall define them more formally later on.

The class P consists of those problems that are solvable in polynomial time. More specifically, they are problems that can be solved in time $O\left(n^k\right)$ for some constant $k$, where $n$ is the size of the input to the problem. Most of the problems examined in previous chapters are in $\mathrm{P}$.

The class NP consists of those problems that are "verifiable" in polynomial time. What do we mean by a problem being verifiable? If we were somehow given a "certificate" of a solution, then we could verify that the certificate is correct in time polynomial in the size of the input to the problem. For example, in the hamiltoniancycle problem, given a directed graph $G=(V, E)$, a certificate would be a sequence $\left\langle v_1, v_2, v_3, \ldots, v_{|V|}\right\rangle$ of $|V|$ vertices. We could easily check in polynomial time that $\left(v_i, v_{i+1}\right) \in E$ for $i=1,2,3, \ldots,|V|-1$ and that $\left(v_{|V|}, v_1\right) \in E$ as well. As another example, for 3-CNF satisfiability, a certificate would be an assignment of values to variables. We could check in polynomial time that this assignment satisfies the boolean formula.

Any problem in $\mathrm{P}$ is also in NP, since if a problem is in $\mathrm{P}$ then we can solve it in polynomial time without even being supplied a certificate. We shall formalize this notion later in this chapter, but for now we can believe that $\mathrm{P} \subseteq N P$. The open question is whether or not $\mathrm{P}$ is a proper subset of NP.