The $i$ th order statistic of a set of $n$ elements is the $i$ th smallest element. For example, the minimum of a set of elements is the first order statistic $(i=1)$, and the maximum is the $n$th order statistic $(i=n)$. A median, informally, is the "halfway point" of the set. When $n$ is odd, the median is unique, occurring at $i=(n+1) / 2$. When $n$ is even, there are two medians, occurring at $i=n / 2$ and $i=n / 2+1$. Thus, regardless of the parity of $n$, medians occur at $i=\lfloor(n+1) / 2\rfloor$ (the lower median) and $i=\lceil(n+1) / 2\rceil$ (the upper median). For simplicity in this text, however, we consistently use the phrase "the median" to refer to the lower median.

This chapter addresses the problem of selecting the $i$ th order statistic from a set of $n$ distinct numbers. We assume for convenience that the set contains distinct numbers, although virtually everything that we do extends to the situation in which a set contains repeated values. We formally specify the selection problem as follows:
Input: A set $A$ of $n$ (distinct) numbers and an integer $i$, with $1 \leq i \leq n$.
Output: The element $x \in A$ that is larger than exactly $i-1$ other elements of $A$.
We can solve the selection problem in $O(n \lg n)$ time, since we can sort the numbers using heapsort or merge sort and then simply index the $i$ th element in the output array. This chapter presents faster algorithms.

In Section 9.1, we examine the problem of selecting the minimum and maximum of a set of elements. More interesting is the general selection problem, which we investigate in the subsequent two sections. Section 9.2 analyzes a practical randomized algorithm that achieves an $O(n)$ expected running time, assuming distinct elements. Section 9.3 contains an algorithm of more theoretical interest that achieves the $O(n)$ running time in the worst case.